[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: We've
all heard of voodoo,
but how about hoodoo?
Today we have a
guest who's going
to share with us a
system of divination that
is unique to the Indigenous and
African populations that lived
in America from its inception.
This system of divination has
been distilled by Tayannah Lee
McQuillar, and we're here
to find out all about it.
I find it absolutely
fascinating.
First of all, we need to get out
here what you do, who you are.
So you're a cultural
anthropologist,
a religious scholar, a
mystic, and a practitioner
of something called Rootwork.
>>TAYANNAH LEE MCQUILLAR: Yes.
>>REGINA: And that is really
grounded into the cards,
the deck of cards.
And it's a fascinating
deck of cards.
I loved reading the book and
then playing with the cards
afterward.
Because it's tarot, but it's
tarot through your lens,
through this
Indigenous lens that
works with plants and ancestors.
So tell us a little bit right
off the bat about hoodoo,
tarot, and how this
all came together.
>> MCQUILLAR: Well, hoodoo is a
body of botanical and esoteric
knowledge that was created
or formulated during colonial
times.
It's a miscegenation of ideas
between Africans, Europeans
and Indigenous people.
I created the tarot because I am
a product of all these people.
And the tarot decks
that were available,
that were marketed to Black
people, I didn't see my family.
I didn't see our lineage,
the landscapes, the colors,
the just everything.
And I thought, well,
why don't I do that?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
>>REGINA: This also
runs in your family,
right, the use of divination.
And let's talk about your
grandma, your grandmother,
the ancestors, and how
this flowed through to you.
>> MCQUILLAR: Well, my paternal
grandmother was a Rootworker,
a well-known one, and
she used playing cards.
And she divined through dreams.
That was very commonly used as
a form of divination for people.
On my mother's side, we
also have Rootworkers,
but they were more tied
in with the church.
So you don't have
the playing cards
so much as you do have dream
interpretation and also
augury, observing animals,
observing the weather,
that kind of thing.
>>REGINA: Would
you say, regardless
of whether a person's
lineage comes from Africa
or the Caribbean or
wherever it comes from,
that this more
innate understanding
of intuitive forces, of knowing
to pay attention to your dreams,
as such, is indigenous in
general to the Black populations
that immigrated
here from wherever?
>> MCQUILLAR: Absolutely,
I think it's worldwide.
That's why you find these
practices in all cultures,
all traditions, just
connecting with the land
and also using the land
to inform the self.
So that just-- that's
just a worldwide thing.
But this particular
tradition has its lineage
in the Woodlands, in the
Southeast and the Northeast.
So just this whole coast here.
>>REGINA: The East Coast.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yes, absolutely.
So it's a very distinct
lineage because it's
like no other lineage.
United States has a
very unique history.
And that's the problem, is
that everybody's kind of put--
kind of mushed together
just based on phenotype.
And that's a mistake.
>>REGINA: Explain that to us--
>> MCQUILLAR: Facial features.
>>REGINA: --why it's a mistake.
>> MCQUILLAR: Because
we have a unique--
we have a unique history here
that happened nowhere else.
We have an Indigenous
population that was enslaved.
And we don't talk
about that a lot,
but they worked right
alongside the African slaves
and the indentured Europeans.
Everybody was working together.
And a lot of slavery
movies and things
like that, you don't see just
how diverse the colonial America
was.
And also these kind
of mega slave owners
with movies like Roots, where
you see hundreds of people
out there--
>>REGINA: Right.
>> MCQUILLAR: That's like saying
everybody in colonial America
owned a Maserati.
You know what I mean?
>>REGINA: It wasn't like that.
>> MCQUILLAR: No, it wasn't.
Most of the slave owners were
working alongside the slaves,
and most people only
owned less than 10 people.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>> MCQUILLAR: So everybody
was working side by side,
whether they were
indentured, free, or not.
And they were mixing
for about 100 years
before you have these
anti-miscegenation laws.
>>REGINA: Right!
And that's something that
we're not told, either.
>> MCQUILLAR: No.
>>REGINA: And so,
OK, first of all,
you don't like being called
African-American because just
because you're Black doesn't
mean that you're from Africa.
Your people, initial
genealogy, was from Africa.
Could have been anywhere.
So you say it hails back to
a more indigenous species.
>> MCQUILLAR: Right.
So I have ancestors that
were broad-featured that
have my appearance, but they
were reclassified as people
of African descent or mulatto.
Like I was telling
you before, the Indian
was killed more with the pen
than with disease or war.
And then you had people
from India, the Black people
from India, that were
reclassified as Negro.
You had Gypsies that were
So the Black community
is not a monolith.
>>REGINA: No.
Why did they reclassify
everyone as Negro?
Why just-- why did you try to
make one bulk classification
of people just because their
skin was a few shades darker?
>> MCQUILLAR: Well,
it was just so-- well,
for the Indigenous population,
it was a way to remove them from
the land.
>>REGINA: OK.
>> MCQUILLAR: OK?
>>REGINA: To reclassify.
>> MCQUILLAR: To reclassify
them to steal the land.
>>REGINA: Then they get lumped
in with the slave population
too.
>> MCQUILLAR: Well, they
were enslaved as well.
>>REGINA: And they
were enslaved.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
So terms like "massa," like
a lot of people think that is
a product of maybe Black
people not being able to speak
properly, when that was actually
an Algonquin word that meant
boss.
>>REGINA: Massa?
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah, boss.
>>REGINA: Boss, massa.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
So it's things like that.
We're just not taught
American history the way
it should be taught.
>>REGINA: Well,
that's the truth.
We are so uninformed in
America about our history.
>> MCQUILLAR: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: So when you just said
something a little bit ago,
not only did people work
alongside one another,
people actually had
not just friendships,
but a lot of intermarriage
early on as the people
came over from Ireland and
England and also the Scotsmen.
Let's talk specifically
about the Scots
and how that kind of crosses
over in terms of clans.
Because we still know that
the Scots-Irish that are
living in Appalachia
are very clan oriented.
In fact, JD Vance
is a representative
of that in Hillbilly
Elegy, where he says,
these are truly hillbillies.
That is a class of people
that are Scots-Irish.
>> MCQUILLAR: Right.
>>REGINA: Similar to the
people that came in the day.
So let's talk
about who they were
and how this came together with
the Indigenous populations.
>> MCQUILLAR: Well,
you have the Scottish,
they were oppressed by the
British and their culture was
considered uncivilized.
And it just-- the
bias was tremendous.
So when they got
here, they can relate
to the problems that
were happening here
and the devastation,
the genocide.
So these populations
came together
and they started to have babies.
And they started
to exchange ideas.
Anybody that's dated anyone
outside of their race
or ethnicity knows that you
don't just exchange feelings,
you're exchanging ideas.
You may be getting recipes.
Times are the same all the time.
People don't change.
>>REGINA: Right.
>> MCQUILLAR: So that's how
these people came together
and it created this thing
that we call hoodoo now.
It's all of these different
people coming together
like a gumbo.
>>REGINA: Clans
working with nature.
>> MCQUILLAR: Clans
And a similarity, also,
just with the geography.
Because you have the
Appalachian Mountains that are--
the Scots actually said,
this looks like the mountains
that we have.
>>REGINA: The Highlands.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah, it looks
just like the Highlands.
>>REGINA: I'm Scot,
Irish and German,
so I've got I've got a little
bit of that blood, quite
a bit of that blood,
actually, in me, too.
I get it.
And they were scallywags.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
>>REGINA: My ancestors
were scallywags.
Terrible.
>> MCQUILLAR: And you get a lot
of teachings through your mom.
Everybody.
Your mother is
your first teacher.
And what they don't teach
us about American history,
especially during
colonial times,
is that most of the
mixing that went on
was between white women,
or European women,
and Indigenous men
or African men.
>>REGINA: Not the
other way around?
Because we always think
of it as the Massa
with the beautiful, young slave.
>> MCQUILLAR: No.
>>REGINA: That's not
what was happening.
>> MCQUILLAR: No, not to the
extent that they've been telling
us.
>>REGINA: Well, and from
what you're saying, too,
it's interesting.
Because people still say,
well, America was founded--
founded upon the notion
of freedom of expression.
And religious freedom,
in particular.
Well, reading your book--
and I've read this before--
I'm going to write down
here, before 1760, only
15% of the Americans that had
come over were religious at all.
These were not--
these were people who
came over like my ancestors.
You'd do what you have to do.
Steal a little land here,
get away with what you can,
try to make a buck.
That's a lot of what
was really going on.
And forming new relationships
with the people that you landed
amongst.
It was not this
glorious, on-high people,
puritanical thing.
>> MCQUILLAR: No.
>>REGINA: The Puritans existed.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yes.
>>REGINA: But that was not
the bulk of the population.
>> MCQUILLAR: Right.
The bulk of the
European population
didn't have a
choice to come here.
And that's also something
we don't discuss.
They came in chains.
>>REGINA: Like my relatives.
Well, and my relatives
got criminals or whatnot.
>> MCQUILLAR: Right!
The prisons were
opened up, the treason.
You know, all these
undesirables in Europe
were sent here
against their will.
But you don't see movies--
>>REGINA: No.
>> MCQUILLAR: --with Europeans
screaming and chains and being
forced onto a boat.
But that's exactly
what happened.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
OK, so now we're
getting the picture
that we had a lot of people
that came here involuntarily.
>> MCQUILLAR: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: And some
people came here
because they couldn't get
along where they were.
And they kind of had to beat it
out of town and they came here.
And so everyone was
surviving on a new land.
We all had clans of
one kind or another.
And we were all
dependent upon the land.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yes.
>>REGINA: And so did the
Indigenous population start
inculcating the notion
of cards and divination
into the European
populations that came?
>> MCQUILLAR: No.
They had what they
called scapulimancy.
>>REGINA: What was that?
>> MCQUILLAR: That's
just reading bones.
>>REGINA: OK.
>> MCQUILLAR: Or small objects.
Where you take them in
your hand and cast them.
>>REGINA: Like runes?
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
So their playing cards
came from Europeans.
And that was just another
tool that was used.
And Indigenous people were
pretty open about incorporating
different ideas.
That's why they adopted
the fashion pretty quickly.
A lot of things weren't
forced on people
as much as we like to think.
People were just broad-minded.
And they used--
so the same thing
applied with occult knowledge.
>>REGINA: Yeah, like the
fashion, as you say--
you and I were
talking off camera--
that early in our lives, we
both had a fascination with 18th
century women's fashion.
>> MCQUILLAR: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: I did.
I was designing things, little
button-up things, little pearl
buttons that I
designed just like you.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Because we were
probably around at that time,
I would say.
Yeah, both of us.
I know I was.
>> MCQUILLAR: I'm more of,
like, about 100 years later,
about 1870.
>>REGINA: Oh, OK.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah, Victorian.
>>REGINA: Little bit after.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah,
a little bit after.
But I love 18th century fashion.
I love it.
>>REGINA: So, now, let's go
ahead and start defining--
now that we've laid
the scene out--
Rootwork.
What is Rootwork?
>> MCQUILLAR: Well Rootwork is
just another term for hoodoo,
so it's interchangeable.
Hoodoo is actually a term
that Black people did not use.
If we went into a
time machine, they
wouldn't know what hoodoo was.
I don't know how hoodoo
got into the lexicon.
I'd have no idea.
But people understand
it as hoodoo.
People understand Rootwork.
>>REGINA: And so it means
working with the land
and literally working
with your book.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And I drew a card.
It was wonderful.
And Angelica came with my
card, the Angelica extract,
which I immediately bought.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah!
>>REGINA: I started
doing little--
little drops of
under the tongue.
So it comes with going
into relationship
with what we know now as these
incredibly refined frequencies
of Bach flower remedies
and other extracts,
like the roots and the
blossoms that you talk about
in your book.
>> MCQUILLAR: Right.
>>REGINA: So each
one of these cards
is associated with one of those.
>> MCQUILLAR: Absolutely.
Tea was the primary
medicine during the-- well,
anytime before the Industrial
era for Black people.
>>REGINA: What was?
>> MCQUILLAR: Tea.
The use of tea.
>>REGINA: The use of tea.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
And so we relied on the land to
provide us with this medicine.
So it had to do with respect.
Respecting the land meant
you get stronger plants,
energetically, to
heal your body.
So that's why I incorporated
that into the tarot deck,
so that people can learn that
native plants are important
as well.
Because I think
a lot of emphasis
has been on Asian or-- whether
it be, yeah, that kind of thing.
But if something were to happen,
how many of us know the plants--
>>REGINA: --surrounding
us that we can use?
Comfrey, things like that.
>> MCQUILLAR: Right.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Did they do-- this is a little
aside-- did they do tea reading?
>> MCQUILLAR: Yes.
>>REGINA: Was that
a common divination
tool to read the tea leaves
in the bottom of the cup?
>> MCQUILLAR: Tea
leaves, coffee grinds.
You can, if you look at a
lot of 19th century art,
you will see a lot of Black
women shown reading playing
cards and also
reading tea leaves.
Absolutely.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
OK.
So another question is, hoodoo
sounds a lot like voodoo.
And as I said in my open,
everyone knows that voodoo is.
They think they do, and
they're afraid of it.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
>>REGINA: So let's
talk about voodoo.
And does voodoo ever intersect
with all of this at any point?
Are there points
of intersection?
>> MCQUILLAR: Well, I think
just being here in the States.
Well, voodoo is practiced in
Mississippi, in Louisiana,
primarily.
But it's a religion.
That's what makes it different.
>>REGINA: Tell us about that.
We just think-- we
just think it's casting
spells, the white population.
>> MCQUILLAR: Right.
No, it is not.
It is a religion like any other.
It has beliefs
about the afterlife.
You have deities.
You have practitioners
or priests.
You have a very
strict hierarchy.
And that's what makes it
different than hoodoo.
There is no-- there
are no regulators.
There are no intermediaries.
The elders are your
family members.
It's an oral tradition
that's passed down.
There's no uniformity
to our tradition,
whereas maybe if
you go to Louisiana,
you're going to see a
little bit more uniformity.
But voodoo itself is
also practiced in Africa.
So it takes on a
different flavor in Africa
than it does in the South, the
South of the United States.
So that's the difference.
>>REGINA: It's
interesting because people
know this about me, I've studied
hermetics for many years.
And they do-- it's a very
interesting body of information
about different capabilities,
mental capabilities,
different traditions around
the world throughout time.
And it talked about
voodoo being used
in indigenous ways for
magic as well, to use magic.
And how in the real
medicine men that
knew how to use their
minds, were incredibly
effective and powerful.
So when they cast a
spell at that time,
or whether it's good or
bad, it was very powerful
and had it could change
physical reality.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And so that's
something people, when they--
they're not incorrect to
say, oh I'm scared of that
because someone could
cast some voodoo on me
and I'd be screwed or whatever.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
>>REGINA: That is possible if
you got with a really, really
skilled medicine person.
>> MCQUILLAR: Sure.
>>REGINA: So it's
just mental mastery
in that particular modality
of thinking and healing.
>> MCQUILLAR: That's it.
That's exactly what it is.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
>>REGINA: So in America, now we
get we go a little bit forward
and we have a lot of Black
churches, Christian churches.
And they're the ones you
say that often suppressed
these practices,
the hoodoo practices
and beliefs and religion.
Why did they do that?
And what was the result of
that to the populations that
were here in America?
>> MCQUILLAR: Well--
>>REGINA: Give us some real
history and education on this.
>> MCQUILLAR: OK.
So the Black church
is different.
It was different.
There was no suppression of
hoodoo because the people,
the practitioners were also
your pastors and your deacons
and your mothers of the church.
I would say that more
of the suppression
came after Black people
started becoming certified.
They started going
to theology school.
That's when you start getting a
little bit more of the prejudice
or the bias against
hoodoo practitioners.
But before about
1920, not so much.
>>REGINA: OK, so yeah, that's
what I was reading in your book.
It was both supported
and then suppressed.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
>>REGINA: By the churches.
So now you're saying
that's because as they
became, as you say, certified.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Certifiable.
>> MCQUILLAR: And
the Great Migration.
Because now, it's like a
combination of those factors.
So you have people--
that you have pastors that are
now going to theology school,
they're now going to college.
And then the problem
gets compacted
once a lot of Black Americans
start moving from the South
and going to the West
Coast and the East Coast.
They don't want to look like
country bumpkins anymore.
They don't want
to look primitive.
And these are all the-- this is
the nature of the conversation
about Rootwork.
It's old fashioned at best.
A lot of my cousins don't
want to talk about it.
I received death threats
with my first book about it.
>>REGINA: Oh, my god.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
People were pissed that
I was talking about it.
Because we want to-- you want
to look sophisticated now.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Everyone's trying to blend
into the new quote, "norm."
Which is a shame.
>> MCQUILLAR: Right.
And our pastors
are no different.
People started moving
away and denying,
and that's what happened.
>>REGINA: Let's talk
about your grandma,
what you learned
as a little child,
what you observed
and learned, and what
was instilled with you from
both sides of the family.
But particularly your
paternal grandmother
that you mentioned that would
take you so far as being both
an academic and a Rootworker.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah, well, my
paternal grandmother passed away
in 1965, so I never--
>>REGINA: Oh, you
didn't get to meet her.
So this was all really
an ancestral lineage
that you came to know.
>> MCQUILLAR: Absolutely.
I look just like her.
I posted her on Instagram.
You have to check that out.
I look just like her.
>>REGINA: Maybe you are her.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
My father actually said that.
>>REGINA: He did?
You're a lot like her?
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
>>REGINA: OK, Grandma, tell
us all about it firsthand.
>> MCQUILLAR: But yeah, she was
accused of being mentally ill,
as a lot of spiritual people
were back then and still are,
unfortunately.
But yeah, she was
well respected,
did great work
for the community.
I really wasn't educated--
soul education through her,
but my direct education
about Rootwork came from
my maternal grandmother.
And it's something called
passing the blessing that
occurs, where you
choose a child to talk
to about these kind of matters.
>>REGINA: I see.
The one that you feel is
the most receptive or--
>> MCQUILLAR: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: --previously
developed.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yes, yes.
So she felt comfortable
talking to me about it.
Like I said, I have a
lot of family members
that just don't want
to talk about it.
They want to leave that behind.
And I was always really
curious about Rootwork.
And she taught me about all the
people that she knew growing up.
And she used Rootworkers.
I think the last one was a woman
that she just called Mother.
She passed away in the late
'60s, and she stopped going
to practitioners.
Because she couldn't find
anybody real anymore.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah.
>> MCQUILLAR: But I've heard--
I grew up hearing
about those stories.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: Did your paternal
and maternal grandmothers
know each other?
>> MCQUILLAR: They never met.
>>REGINA: They never met.
They weren't in the
same-- yeah, they
wouldn't have had reason
to be at that time.
>> MCQUILLAR: No.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah.
So you've been tapped
to deliver the blessing.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yes.
>>REGINA: So how old were
you when this happened?
And how did that take
its course in your life?
I mean, did this surprise
you or you were ready for it?
>> MCQUILLAR: I was always,
I guess, kind of eccentric.
And I used to-- as a child, I
used to go underneath the sink.
Yeah.
And just sit there
for hours, just
in the quiet, and just dream.
So I've always been connected.
I remember just trying to just
feel life and understand myself
as best as I could as a
four-year-old or a five-year-old
when I used to do that.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>> MCQUILLAR: And there was a
movie called The Autobiography
of Miss Jane Pittman
that came on one year.
It used to come on a lot
during Black History Month.
I don't see it anymore.
But there's a scene in that
film where there's a Rootworker,
and she's doing divination.
Cicely Tyson was the
actress for that.
And that's what started
the conversation.
Because I was fascinated
by what she was doing.
>>REGINA: Ah.
So you were quite young.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And so your
grandmother saw this in you.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yes.
>>REGINA: OK.
So how does the education
begin, then, once you're tapped?
>> MCQUILLAR: Just
talking about the past.
Yeah.
Because she didn't
know any-- again,
she didn't know anyone that
was real past the 1960s.
So she just talked about
the people that she knew.
She did not consider
herself a Rootworker at all,
but she respected
it a great deal.
And she told me about our family
members that were practitioners
and how good they were.
And I put one in the deck.
Miss Robinson was
actually my cousin.
So yeah, I grew up on
stories, with stories.
And then I started doing
more research on my own.
Because, again, it's
very, very practical.
Just learning herbs, learning--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
Just learning prayer.
>>REGINA: Did she
help you with any
of that, the herbs or anything?
Or did you have to
get that on your own?
>> MCQUILLAR: I had
to get that on my own.
But she knew everything.
She went to-- we went to Central
Park a lot just to walk around.
And she would know a lot of
the plants that were there.
But she didn't recognize the
Latin terms for these plants,
or even the layman's
terms for these plants.
She called them something else.
And one woman,
I'll never forget,
the woman said, do you
have a degree in botany?
And she said, no,
this is just life.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: So this came with
her, this understanding
of plants and their healing
capacities with humans.
But then you went ahead
and studied it further
when you were creating the deck.
>> MCQUILLAR: Absolutely, yeah.
>>REGINA: And how did that
come about, in terms of--
like, I drew a card that
was the Four of Sticks.
We're going to go
into the suites.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
>>REGINA: I drew
a Four of Sticks
that has Angelica with it.
How did you associate
these attributes?
Let's just take that card,
the attributes of that card,
with Angelica root.
How did this?
>> MCQUILLAR: Well, Angelica
root is associated with love.
And the image on
the card is a couple
burying the placenta
of their child
underneath the tree, which is
the ultimate symbol of love
and protection.
So I associated different--
the properties of the herbs
with the message in the card.
And a lot of these herbs,
they have maybe two or three
meanings, if not more.
>>REGINA: Right.
>> MCQUILLAR: So I just had to
pick the one that I wanted--
>>REGINA: Most closely relates.
>> MCQUILLAR: Or I just wanted--
or just the one that I wanted
to emphasize for that
particular message.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Because it does require some
intuitive work on your part,
along with knowledge.
And that's what you're marrying.
And so let's talk
about the deck itself.
I had fun playing with it.
And I just got in a very
clear space and said,
OK, show me the now of
whomever I'm asking about.
And I would just get
calm and chose one
for a friend, one for
her fiance, one for me
and a couple other people.
But they were
astoundingly right on.
Now, part of that is because I
was in a calm space and drawing.
But part of it,
it was the clarity
of the card itself to explain
these situations people were in.
And not all of them were easy.
Some were challenging.
>> MCQUILLAR: Right.
>>REGINA: So let's talk
about the cards in the suites
because they differ a little
bit from standard tarot.
>> MCQUILLAR: Absolutely.
Well, this deck is modeled off
of the ideal nuclear family,
pre-industrial nuclear family.
>>REGINA: What was
the ideal family then?
>> MCQUILLAR: I mean, you
have your extended family
and community.
Black Americans have always
been multigenerational-focused,
where you have Big Mama.
Your grandmother was the leader.
So the hoodoo tarot reflects--
>>REGINA: It was
always matriarchal?
>> MCQUILLAR: Always, as
Indigenous Americans are
matriarchal.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>> MCQUILLAR: And
that's the difference.
I think that's the key
difference with the hoodoo
tarot.
So, for example, the sun and
most European cultures are--
is associated with masculinity.
But in my deck, it
is a feminine card.
And the moon is a
masculine card in my deck.
>>REGINA: Interesting, yes.
>> MCQUILLAR: So we also don't
have the aristocracy or medieval
or Renaissance images because
it's an American deck.
So I have the elders
as the Major Arcana
because they're the repository
of wisdom and tradition
in any culture.
And then you have the family,
which is the court cards.
So you have the mother,
the father, the daughter
and the son.
>>REGINA: Yes, yes.
And so what are the four--
there are sticks and--
>> MCQUILLAR: Baskets.
>>REGINA: Baskets.
>> MCQUILLAR: And coins.
>>REGINA: Coins.
>> MCQUILLAR: And knives.
>>REGINA: And knives, right.
But it's interesting,
I just want
to add a little something
in here because it's
coming back around again.
It's going to come around.
And that is these
matriarchal lineages,
they were matriarchal
for a reason.
There was a clear understanding
that the female and the male
had very different attributes
and gifts to offer.
But when it came to
community and having
to heal and advise and
keep a community healthy,
that it was the feminine--
>> MCQUILLAR: Yes.
>>REGINA: And it was
the feminine mind.
And now, neuroscience is
beginning to understand this--
and prove it and
map it out on MRIs--
that the female brain
is uniquely wired
so that it can communicate
very rapidly between the two
hemispheres for both logic
and intuition simultaneously.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Which it sets it
up ideally for leadership.
And that you have
to have leadership
in a tribe or a family.
There has to be someone who
can make these clear decisions
for the best of all,
where the men are very
endowed with the ability to take
something forward, go for it
and manifest it,
take it to completion
in a very targeted way.
And the female's energy is
more diffused toward the tribe
or family.
So it makes sense that they
were matrilineal naturally,
or matriarchal naturally.
And so now we're starting
to discover this again.
So it'll be interesting.
>> MCQUILLAR: Wow.
>>REGINA: It'll be
interesting to see
what happens with
leadership around the world.
It's totally
appropriate for women
to be in leadership positions.
It's natural to us to be
in leadership positions.
>> MCQUILLAR: It's
going to take a lot.
>>REGINA: It's going
to take a little time.
Just like everything
else is taking time.
So how would a person,
then, use the deck,
begin interfacing with
your deck and using it?
You've got a wonderful book.
And then it sets--
everything we've talked
about, sets it up.
And then it explains
each of the cards.
So how would you
approach it initially?
And how do you lay the deck
out uniquely to your cards?
>> MCQUILLAR: I think that the
best way to learn any deck is
to do a card of the day.
Just pull one card
in the morning
or one card in the evening.
It depends on who
you are, right?
In the morning, you
may want some insight
into what may occur that day.
Or you may want to reflect
on what happened that day.
I think that's a very personal
way to get to know tarot.
Of course, read the book
and read the definitions,
but don't get locked in.
Look at the image and see
what jumps out at you.
It may be something that's
in the background that
means something.
Because you're going to be
the one to read the cards.
So create a personal
relationship with the cards.
That's how I learned
tarot back in the '90s.
I just took a Rider-Waite deck--
>>REGINA: Yeah, the classic.
>> MCQUILLAR: The classic, yeah.
I love it, love it, love it.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>> MCQUILLAR: And I wrote down
how I felt about the card.
And then I read the
descriptions in the books.
>>REGINA: Were they
usually validated?
I mean, did you
usually find there
was some similarity
between how you felt
and what the explanation
for the card was?
>> MCQUILLAR: Sometimes.
>>REGINA: But it's really
important that we put our own--
>> MCQUILLAR: You have to.
>>REGINA: --feelings
and meanings into it.
And not just, I
didn't like tarot
because I don't like
seeing these cards of death
and destruction and everything.
I don't want to see that
card show up in front of me.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah, The
Tower is usually a problem.
>>REGINA: And I didn't--
yeah, The Tower is a problem,
and I didn't understand.
It just, like, creeped me out.
So I just avoided
decks entirely.
>> MCQUILLAR: Oh, no!
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
A lot of people will
not play with tarot
because they don't want to
see the negative imagery.
>> MCQUILLAR: But it
doesn't have to be.
Because The Tower, you
see this lightning bolt.
That's what I used to focus on.
Not so much the people
falling out of the window.
I focused on the lightning
and that flash of inspiration.
You know?
I think it depends
on if you're more
of an optimist or a pessimist.
>>REGINA: I'm an
optimist, but I didn't
like those negative images.
And so I stayed away from it.
And I didn't let people
do tarot readings for me.
>> MCQUILLAR: OK.
>>REGINA: That's only
been very recently.
Someone that's a very close
friend, someone I interview
on this show, who draws
cards from the deck.
You spoke of the common deck.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yes.
>>REGINA: Every single morning.
And I'd come down for tea.
And she'd start drawing cards.
I'm like, do we have to do this?
And then I started seeing
how she did it, and said,
don't worry about this
upside down stuff.
So let's talk about this.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
>>REGINA: The upside down thing.
And we don't have to be
so rigid about it, right?
>> MCQUILLAR: I've
never done reversals.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>> MCQUILLAR: It didn't
feel natural for me.
I've been read by people that
use reversals and the readings
came out fantastic.
I just don't like it.
Again, you just have to go
with what you feel, you know?
I know when
something's not right.
I don't need it to be reversed.
There are usually a
lot more indicators
that something is not for me.
Because a lot of times,
things are not bad.
They're just not for you.
You know what I mean?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And so if you're using it
as divination, some people--
like me, it doesn't
matter if it's astrology
or what, I tend to go out
and blast through life,
make my own decisions,
my own mistakes.
And then I look at
it in hindsight.
I do a lot of--
I mean, that's fun.
I'll think, God, what was
happening during that period?
There it is.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
>>REGINA: But what
about the notion
that if you use divination
for future pacing,
that you're kind of maybe
programming yourself?
Or how do you feel about that?
>> MCQUILLAR: Well, I don't see
it as a fortune-telling tool.
It's like a probability
tool, right?
It's no different than
watching the news.
It may rain.
I may see that.
Sometimes it doesn't.
But why not bring an umbrella?
>>REGINA: Yeah,
yeah, that's true.
>> MCQUILLAR: I just don't
think of it that way.
You know what I mean?
I think it's just
a wonderful tool
just to get a gauge
of what is possible.
And there are infinite
possibilities.
You don't have to-- you can
make a different choice.
If you see that, I don't know,
you're going on a job interview,
you pull a card and it sucks.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>> MCQUILLAR: OK.
Why does it suck?
What can you do to
make it suck less?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>> MCQUILLAR:
That's how I use it.
It doesn't mean that you're
not going to get the job.
But maybe there's something
that you're missing.
And that's what--
>>REGINA: Maybe you need to
be extra alert or whatever.
>> MCQUILLAR: Or
change your outfit.
>>REGINA: Or change your outfit.
Yeah, something like that.
So you have used it throughout
your lifetime, I assume.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yes,
since the '90s.
>>REGINA: And even
on a daily basis.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yes.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And so that's
exactly what you do,
if you have a unique opportunity
coming up or whatnot.
Well, now you're out there.
You've got this beautiful
book and deck out there.
So how did that show
itself in the cards
to you, that you would be out
there promoting this and making
this your life's work after
your educational background?
Besides death
threats and all that.
But yeah.
[LAUGHTER]
>> MCQUILLAR: I wanted to teach
people that we have a culture
here.
We have a spiritual
tradition here.
Because that's the reason why I
wrote my first book on Rootwork,
because the emphasis is usually
on Africa and the Caribbean
when it comes to Black
people having a philosophy,
having a way.
And I wanted people to know
that we have that right here
in the United States.
It's unique to us.
It's unique to just
our experiences here.
And it's worthy of knowing.
And when I pull cards,
or I used to pull cards,
I used to get those
cards that you dreaded.
Because I knew there
would be pushback.
>>REGINA: OK.
>> MCQUILLAR: Because our
tradition was pretty much
classified just as
Negro superstition.
Nothing to be taken seriously.
>>REGINA: So you
knew you were going
to be up against a challenge.
>> MCQUILLAR: Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
And I was ready for it.
And I'm still ready for it.
>>REGINA: So how is it in
dealing with other Black
Americans who have said, I want
to get as far away from any
of those roots as possible?
Are you able to get
through-- and that includes
all populations, really.
Everyone's just trying to blend
and almost stereotype themselves
into what the ideal is today.
How do you feel?
Can you get through
pretty easily
to other Black
Americans who have
left this rich history behind?
>> MCQUILLAR: I'm
not interested.
I'm not interested in trying
to convince anyone of anything.
In fact, I spoke to the
descendant of Dr. buzzard.
Dr. Buzzard was a really
famous practitioner.
In the standard deck,
it would be Justice.
But in my deck,
it's Dr. Buzzard.
And his descendant,
she's passed now.
I spoke to her in
like 2017, 2018.
And she said, there's
nothing to chase.
There's no one to convince.
Because I asked her, what do
you think of this reclamation
of the culture?
And she said, it's ridiculous.
It's meant to die in
certain people's bloodline.
She felt that it's died in her.
She had eight children.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>> MCQUILLAR: And
she said, it's OK.
We've served the
community for centuries.
It's time for someone
else to serve.
It's not-- this
kind of empowerment,
that's not what this is about.
Sometimes it's time
to pass the torch.
So that's why I'm not looking
to recruit or convince.
The people that gravitate
towards the tradition
because it's either
in their lineage
or because they
just feel like it's
time for us, for our
tradition, to make a comeback,
or at least be part of
the cultural conversation
in terms of spirituality,
that's what it's all about.
I'm not interested
in proselytizing.
>>REGINA: That's good.
And so I think it's
really brilliant of you
to have chosen this
path and to do it
in such an articulate
and beautiful way,
weave this back in where
the bulk of the population
is getting their information
and their cues from media.
>> MCQUILLAR: Right.
>>REGINA: Which isn't
serving us any longer.
I don't know your
views on that, but--
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
>>REGINA: I don't
think it's serving us
any longer, the vast
majority of media.
Because right now,
I've had conversations
with people about AI
and you don't even
know what's real anymore.
But we didn't know what
was real before that.
>> MCQUILLAR: That's right.
>>REGINA: The media was always
skewed from the very beginning.
>> MCQUILLAR: 100%.
>>REGINA: Always editorializing,
though, pretending to be--
>> MCQUILLAR: Objective, yeah.
>>REGINA: Objective.
It never has really,
truly been objective.
>> MCQUILLAR: No.
>>REGINA: So now, how
do we find our truth?
How do we learn about
the intuition and beauty
that lives within us?
It seems like that's what
you're trying to bring back.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yes, I'm trying
to get to bring back the basics.
Yeah go back to Mother wit.
Go back to Father wit.
Go back to your grandparents
and find nuggets of truth
there in your tangible
bloodline ancestry.
Because everybody's kind of
exotifying and commodifying
the exotic.
And it's like-- especially
Americans, in my opinion,
after reading people
for a long time.
>>REGINA: You've been reading
people from all over the world?
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah, it's
really a problem here.
It's like there's a weird
low self-esteem, I think,
that Americans have--
of all colors--
that we don't have
anything here.
We always have to go out there,
to find culture, to find depth.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>> MCQUILLAR: It's weird.
>>REGINA: I remember reading
a large study on this.
It's been years now.
I wish I could draw it all
up on exactly what you're
talking about, about the low
self-esteem among Americans.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And could it be
that because we're constantly
being preached at
to reach some sort
of ideal, standard
or exalted state
and never being accepted
for what we actually
are, that that's created it?
>> MCQUILLAR: It's possible,
but it could be just the way we
began.
I mean, we just discussed,
indentured servants, slaves.
And these are not glamorous
stories, you know?
So it's like--
>>REGINA: Reprobates
like my family.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah, that's--
that gives people a lot of
people a sense of shame.
>>REGINA: Yeah, and
that's reinforced
by the church, of course.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
>>REGINA: To feel
ashamed of ourselves
because we're a lesser than.
>> MCQUILLAR: So
it's all compounded.
And it's just crusty
at this point.
And that's what I'm
trying to get across
is that we have
a tradition here.
We have a history.
We all have our own histories.
No matter what
your ethnicity is,
there are powerful
ancestors in your bloodline.
You know what I mean?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And interestingly, you
have your deck you have,
which is based on the
playing cards of past times.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And then you have
another guest of ours here,
and a friend, Robert Kemp, who
wrote the love cards and destiny
cards.
All of that's based
on playing cards.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
>>REGINA: That's
coming back full on.
People are fascinated
with this again.
So these systems are-- that old
systems are starting to emerge.
That's a very ancient
system before Egypt.
And it's absolutely fascinating.
So what you're doing is, seems
to me, keeping right in step
with the times and what
we need now to get real,
to discover who we are,
to know ourselves better.
>> MCQUILLAR: And accept
ourselves honestly and wholly.
You know?
And to change the narrative
that America is just,
like, a soulless place, that
you just come just to make money
or-- there's a soul here.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>> MCQUILLAR: An old soul.
We have the oldest--
one of the oldest mountain
ranges in the world.
Why aren't people
making pilgrimages here
to our National Parks?
>>REGINA: Right.
And very ancient
Indigenous populations.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah!
>>REGINA: Very, very ancient.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
>>REGINA: We're not just going
back a few thousand years.
We just scratched the
surface, going back
to when the settlers
came and met
the existing Native populations.
That was the end of the line.
>> MCQUILLAR: And the
cities that they demolished.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
Cities they demolished.
So much more to learn.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Well, I-- any final
thoughts before we say goodbye?
I really appreciate
that you're bringing
all this back, this
rich body of work,
to help people find a
richness to themselves again.
>> MCQUILLAR: Yeah.
I just want to say, just
be proud to be an American.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Because we're being
made to feel like we're
the naughty people
on the planet.
>> MCQUILLAR: Oh, yeah.
But a lot of people have--
we have some interesting
histories there.
No, it's not just us.
>>REGINA: It's not just us.
>> MCQUILLAR: It's not just us.
>>REGINA: Tayannah,
thank you so much.
It's been absolutely delightful.
And thank you for
helping us understand
other historical perspectives
in what they taught us
in elementary school.
>> MCQUILLAR: You're welcome.
Thank you for having me.
>>REGINA: You can
find The Hoodoo Tarot
through major booksellers.
And you can reach Tayannah
through Tayannah Lee McQuillar
on Instagram.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Open Minds.
[THEME MUSIC]